Access to THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1993 provided courtesy of 
The Libraries of the University of Missouri-St. Louis
 
 Match 114   DB Rec# - 55,861  Dataset-WOFACT
 
Source        :CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
Source key    :CI 
Program       :WORLD FACTBOOK 
Program key   :CI WOFACT 
Update sched. :Annually         
ID number     :CI WOFACT 113              
Title         :INDIAN OCEAN 
Data type     :TEXT 
End year      :1994
Date of record:02/16/1994
Keywords 3    : 
| INDIAN OCEAN 
Text          : 
INDIAN OCEAN 
GEOGRAPHY 
Location: body of water between Africa, Asia, Australia, and Antarctica 
 
Map references: Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
 
Area: 
 
total area: 73.6 million km2 
third-largest ocean (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but larger 
than the Arctic Ocean) 
 
note: includes Arabian Sea, Bass Straight, Bay of Bengal, Java Sea, 
Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Straight of Malacca, Timor Sea, and other tributary 
water bodies 
 
Coastline: 66,526 km 
 
International disputes: some maritime disputes (see littoral states) 
 
Climate: northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon (June to 
October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and October/November in the 
north Indian Ocean and January/February in the south Indian Ocean 
 
Terrain: surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad, circular 
system of currents) in the south Indian Ocean; unique reversal of surface 
currents in the north Indian Ocean, low atmospheric pressure over southwest 
Asia from hot, rising, summer air results in the southwest monsoon and 
southwest-to-northeast winds and currents, while high pressure over northern 
Asia from cold, falling, winter air results in the northeast monsoon and 
northeast-to-southwest winds and currents; ocean floor is dominated by the 
Mid-Indian Ocean Ridge and subdivided by the Southeast Indian Ocean Ridge, 
Southwest Indian Ocean Ridge, and Ninety East Ridge; maximum depth is 7,258 
meters in the Java Trench 
 
Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and gravel 
aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules 
 
Environment: endangered marine species include the dugong, seals, turtles, 
and whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea 
 
Note: major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of Hormuz, Strait of 
Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and the Lombok Strait; ships 
subject to superstructure icing in extreme south near Antarctica from May to 
October 
 
GOVERNMENT 
Digraph: XO 
 
ECONOMY 
Overview: The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting the Middle 
East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas. It carries a 
particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum products from the oil 
fields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Its fish are of great and growing 
importance to the bordering countries for domestic consumption and export. 
Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian 
Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being 
tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and Western 
Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil production comes from 
the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals and offshore placer 
deposits are actively exploited by bordering countries, particularly India, 
South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. 
 
Industries: based on exploitation of natural resources, particularly 
marine life, minerals, oil and gas production, fishing, sand and gravel 
aggregates, placer deposits 
 
Lanka), Durban (South Africa), Fremantle (Australia), Jakarta (Indonesia), 
Melbourne (Australia), Richard's Bay (South Africa) 
 
Telecommunications: submarine cables from India to United Arab Emirates 
and Malaysia, and from Sri Lanka to Djibouti and Indonesia 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
This section of THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1993 produced by the United States
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was derived from the US Dept. of Commerce
Economics and Statistics Division's NATIONAL TRADE DATA BANK CD-ROM,
July, 1994, SuDoc No. C 1.88:994/7/v.1-2 / R. Muns, UM-St. Louis Libraries 
Local Filename: WF940111.TXT
